docs/citation.md, before:

# How to Cite

Per [the ScPCA Portal Terms of Use](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/terms-of-use), users must cite the following when publishing or presenting data or your results:

- The individual project(s) (see [Citing a project](#citing-a-project))
- The ScPCA Portal using the information [below](#citing-the-scpca-portal)

## Citing a project

Please review the project page for the project you cite for any specific citation language included in the project abstract from the data contributor and any listed publications.
You can view the project page by substituting the project accession code in the following URL: `https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/{project accession}`, e.g., to find the project page for `SCPCP000004`, you can navigate to <https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000004>.
The link to the project page is also included in the Citation section of the README included in your download.

Please note that although we try to keep the publication information as up-to-date as possible, the citation information available on the ScPCA Portal may lag behind publication. 
Please consider contacting the project contact (also available on the project page) if no publications are listed.

## Citing the ScPCA Portal

The date you accessed the data from the ScPCA Portal can be found in your data download: once you uncompress your download, the root directory name will contain the access date.

### APA Format

Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation Childhood Cancer Data Lab. (n.d.). The Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas Portal. Retrieved {insert access date}, from https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/

### MLA Format

The Single-Cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas Portal, Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation Childhood Cancer Data Lab, https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/. Accessed {insert access date}.

Commit message:

Add citation for bioRxiv preprint

docs/citation.md, after:

# How to Cite

Per [the ScPCA Portal Terms of Use](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/terms-of-use), users must cite the following when publishing or presenting data or your results:

- The individual project(s) (see [Citing a project](#citing-a-project))
- The ScPCA Portal using the information [below](#citing-the-scpca-portal)

## Citing a project

Please review the project page for the project you cite for any specific citation language included in the project abstract from the data contributor and any listed publications.
You can view the project page by substituting the project accession code in the following URL: `https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/{project accession}`, e.g., to find the project page for `SCPCP000004`, you can navigate to <https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000004>.
The link to the project page is also included in the Citation section of the README included in your download.

Please note that although we try to keep the publication information as up-to-date as possible, the citation information available on the ScPCA Portal may lag behind publication.
Please consider contacting the project contact (also available on the project page) if no publications are listed.

## Citing the ScPCA Portal

When citing the ScPCA Portal, please cite the following preprint:

Hawkins A. G., J. A. Shapiro, S. J. Spielman, D. S. Mejia, D. V. Prasad, et al., 2024 The Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas: Data portal and open-source tools for single-cell transcriptomics of pediatric tumors. _bioRxiv._ https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.19.590243
