docs/sce_file_contents.md, before:

# Single-cell gene expression file contents

Single cell or single-nuclei gene expression data (filtered or unfiltered) is provided for use with R as an RDS file containing a [`SingleCellExperiment` object](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html).
This object contains the expression data, cell and gene metrics, associated metadata, and, in the case of multimodal data like CITE-seq, data from additional cell-based assays.

We highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general object structure and functions available as part of the [`SingleCellExperiment` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.13/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html) from Bioconductor.
Below we present some details about the specific contents of the objects we provide.

To begin, you will need to load the `SingleCellExperiment` package and read the RDS file:

```r
library(SingleCellExperiment)
sce <- readRDS("SCPCL000000_filtered.rds")
```

## Components of a `SingleCellExperiment` object

### Expression counts

The `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object for single-cell and single-nuclei experiments (both unfiltered and filtered) contains the primary RNA-seq expression data as integer counts.
The data is stored as a sparse matrix, and each column represents a cell or droplet, each row a gene.
Column names are cell barcode sequences and row names are Ensembl gene IDs. 
The `counts` assay can be accessed with the following R code:

```r
count_matrix <- counts(sce)
```

### Cell metrics

Cell metrics calculated from the RNA-seq expression data are stored as a `DataFrame` in the `colData` slot, with the cell barcodes as the names of the rows.

```r
cell_metrics <- colData(sce)
```

The following per-cell data columns are included for each cell, calculated using the [`scuttle::addPerCellQCMetrics`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/scuttle/man/addPerCellQCMetrics.html) function. 

| Column name             | Contents                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `sum`                   | UMI count for RNA-seq data                                                                                                                                                                    |
| `detected`              | Number of genes detected (gene count > 0 )                                                                                                                                                    |
| `subsets_mito_sum`      | UMI count of mitochondrial genes                                                                                                                                                              |
| `subsets_mito_detected` | Number of mitochondrial genes detected                                                                                                                                                        |
| `subsets_mito_percent`  | Percent of all UMI counts assigned to mitochondrial genes                                                                                                                                     |
| `total`                 | Total UMI count for RNA-seq data and any alternative experiments (i.e., CITE-seq)                                                                                                             |

The following are additional per-cell data columns included only in `filtered` objects. 
These metrics were calculated by using [`miQC`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/miQC.html), a package that jointly models proportion of reads belonging to mitochondrial genes and number of unique genes detected to predict low-quality cells. 

| Column name             | Contents                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `prob_compromised`      | Probability that a cell is compromised (i.e., dead or damaged), as calculated by `miQC`                                                                                                       |
| `miQC_pass`             | Indicates whether the cell passed the default miQC filtering. `TRUE` is assigned to cells with a low probability of being compromised (`prob_compromised` < 0.75) or [sufficiently low mitochondrial content](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/miQC/inst/doc/miQC.html#preventing-exclusion-of-low-mito-cells).  |

### Gene information and metrics

Gene information and metrics calculated from the RNA-seq expression data are stored as a `DataFrame` in the `rowData` slot, with the Ensembl ID as the names of the rows.

```r
gene_info <- rowData(sce)
```

The following columns are included for all genes. 
Metrics were calculated using the [`scuttle::addPerFeatureQCMetrics`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/scuttle/man/addPerFeatureQCMetrics.html) function.

| Column name   | Contents                                                         |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `gene_symbol` | [HUGO](https://www.genenames.org) gene symbol, if defined        |
| `mean`        | Mean count across all cells/droplets                             |
| `detected`    | Number of cells in which the gene was detected (gene count > 0 ) |

### Experiment metadata

Metadata associated with {ref}`data processing <processing_information:Processing information>` is included in the `metadata` slot as a list.

```r
expt_metadata <- metadata(sce)
```

| Item name           | Contents                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `salmon_version`    | Version of `salmon` used for initial mapping                                                                                   |
| `reference_index`   | Transcriptome reference file used for mapping                                                                                  |
| `total_reads`       | Total number of reads processed by `salmon`                                                                                    |
| `mapped_reads`      | Number of reads successfully mapped                                                                                            |
| `mapping_tool`      | Pipeline used for mapping and quantification (`alevin-fry` for all current data in ScPCA)                                      |
| `alevinfry_version` | Version of `alevin-fry` used for mapping and quantification                                                                    |
| `af_permit_type`    | `alevin-fry generate-permit-list` method used for filtering cell barcodes                                                      |
| `af_resolution`     | `alevin-fry quant` resolution mode used                                                                                        |
| `usa_mode`          | Boolean indicating whether quantification was done using `alevin-fry` USA mode                                                 |
| `af_num_cells`      | Number of cells reported by `alevin-fry`                                                                                       |
| `tech_version`      | A string indicating the technology and version used for the single-cell library, such as 10Xv2, 10Xv3, or 10Xv3.1              |
| `transcript_type`   | Transcripts included in gene counts: `spliced` for single-cell samples and `unspliced` for single-nuclei                       |
| `miQC_model`        | The model object that `miQC` fit to the data and was used to calculate `prob_compromised`. Only present for `filtered` objects |


## Additional `SingleCellExperiment` components for CITE-seq samples

CITE-seq data, when present, is included within the `SingleCellExperiment` as an "Alternative Experiment" named `"CITEseq"` , which can be accessed with the following command:

```r
altExp(sce, "CITEseq")
```

Within this, the main expression matrix is again found in the `counts` assay, with each column corresponding to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponding to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
Column names are again cell barcode sequences and row names the antibody targets for each ADT. 

The following additional per-cell data columns for the CITE-seq data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#cell-metrics)).

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `altexps_CITEseq_sum  `    | UMI count for CITE-seq ADTs                       |
| `altexps_CITEseq_detected` | Number of ADTs detected per cell (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `altexps_CITEseq_percent`  | Percent of `total` UMI count from ADT reads       |

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `DataFrame` stored as `rowData` within the alternative experiment:

```r
adt_info <- rowData(altExp(sce, "CITEseq"))
```

This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT:

| Column name | Contents                                                       |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `mean`      | Mean ADT count across all cells/droplets                       |
| `detected`  | Number of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |

Finally, additional metadata for the CITE-seq data processing can be found in the metadata slot of the alternative experiment, with the same contents as the [parent experiment metadata](#experiment-metadata)

```r
citeseq_metadata <- metadata(altExp(sce, "CITEseq"))
```

Commit message:

add filtering method to metadata in sce contents

docs/sce_file_contents.md, after:

# Single-cell gene expression file contents

Single cell or single-nuclei gene expression data (filtered or unfiltered) is provided for use with R as an RDS file containing a [`SingleCellExperiment` object](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html).
This object contains the expression data, cell and gene metrics, associated metadata, and, in the case of multimodal data like CITE-seq, data from additional cell-based assays.

We highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general object structure and functions available as part of the [`SingleCellExperiment` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.13/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html) from Bioconductor.
Below we present some details about the specific contents of the objects we provide.

To begin, you will need to load the `SingleCellExperiment` package and read the RDS file:

```r
library(SingleCellExperiment)
sce <- readRDS("SCPCL000000_filtered.rds")
```

## Components of a `SingleCellExperiment` object

### Expression counts

The `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object for single-cell and single-nuclei experiments (both unfiltered and filtered) contains the primary RNA-seq expression data as integer counts.
The data is stored as a sparse matrix, and each column represents a cell or droplet, each row a gene.
Column names are cell barcode sequences and row names are Ensembl gene IDs. 
The `counts` assay can be accessed with the following R code:

```r
count_matrix <- counts(sce)
```

### Cell metrics

Cell metrics calculated from the RNA-seq expression data are stored as a `DataFrame` in the `colData` slot, with the cell barcodes as the names of the rows.

```r
cell_metrics <- colData(sce)
```

The following per-cell data columns are included for each cell, calculated using the [`scuttle::addPerCellQCMetrics`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/scuttle/man/addPerCellQCMetrics.html) function. 

| Column name             | Contents                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `sum`                   | UMI count for RNA-seq data                                                                                                                                                                    |
| `detected`              | Number of genes detected (gene count > 0 )                                                                                                                                                    |
| `subsets_mito_sum`      | UMI count of mitochondrial genes                                                                                                                                                              |
| `subsets_mito_detected` | Number of mitochondrial genes detected                                                                                                                                                        |
| `subsets_mito_percent`  | Percent of all UMI counts assigned to mitochondrial genes                                                                                                                                     |
| `total`                 | Total UMI count for RNA-seq data and any alternative experiments (i.e., CITE-seq)                                                                                                             |

The following are additional per-cell data columns included only in `filtered` objects. 
These metrics were calculated by using [`miQC`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/miQC.html), a package that jointly models proportion of reads belonging to mitochondrial genes and number of unique genes detected to predict low-quality cells. 

| Column name             | Contents                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `prob_compromised`      | Probability that a cell is compromised (i.e., dead or damaged), as calculated by `miQC`                                                                                                       |
| `miQC_pass`             | Indicates whether the cell passed the default miQC filtering. `TRUE` is assigned to cells with a low probability of being compromised (`prob_compromised` < 0.75) or [sufficiently low mitochondrial content](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/miQC/inst/doc/miQC.html#preventing-exclusion-of-low-mito-cells).  |

### Gene information and metrics

Gene information and metrics calculated from the RNA-seq expression data are stored as a `DataFrame` in the `rowData` slot, with the Ensembl ID as the names of the rows.

```r
gene_info <- rowData(sce)
```

The following columns are included for all genes. 
Metrics were calculated using the [`scuttle::addPerFeatureQCMetrics`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/scuttle/man/addPerFeatureQCMetrics.html) function.

| Column name   | Contents                                                         |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `gene_symbol` | [HUGO](https://www.genenames.org) gene symbol, if defined        |
| `mean`        | Mean count across all cells/droplets                             |
| `detected`    | Number of cells in which the gene was detected (gene count > 0 ) |

### Experiment metadata

Metadata associated with {ref}`data processing <processing_information:Processing information>` is included in the `metadata` slot as a list.

```r
expt_metadata <- metadata(sce)
```

| Item name           | Contents                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `salmon_version`    | Version of `salmon` used for initial mapping                                                                                   |
| `reference_index`   | Transcriptome reference file used for mapping                                                                                  |
| `total_reads`       | Total number of reads processed by `salmon`                                                                                    |
| `mapped_reads`      | Number of reads successfully mapped                                                                                            |
| `mapping_tool`      | Pipeline used for mapping and quantification (`alevin-fry` for all current data in ScPCA)                                      |
| `alevinfry_version` | Version of `alevin-fry` used for mapping and quantification                                                                    |
| `af_permit_type`    | `alevin-fry generate-permit-list` method used for filtering cell barcodes                                                      |
| `af_resolution`     | `alevin-fry quant` resolution mode used                                                                                        |
| `usa_mode`          | Boolean indicating whether quantification was done using `alevin-fry` USA mode                                                 |
| `af_num_cells`      | Number of cells reported by `alevin-fry`                                                                                       |
| `tech_version`      | A string indicating the technology and version used for the single-cell library, such as 10Xv2, 10Xv3, or 10Xv3.1              |
| `transcript_type`   | Transcripts included in gene counts: `spliced` for single-cell samples and `unspliced` for single-nuclei                       |
| `miQC_model`        | The model object that `miQC` fit to the data and was used to calculate `prob_compromised`. Only present for `filtered` objects |
| `filtering_method`  | Which method was used for filtering, one of `emptyDrops`, `emptyDropsCellRanger`, or `UMI cutoff`. Only present for `filtered` objects |
| `umi_cutoff`        | Only present if the `filtering_method` is `UMI cutoff`. The minimum number of UMI per cell used as a threshold for filtering. Only present for `filtered` objects.  |

## Additional `SingleCellExperiment` components for CITE-seq samples

CITE-seq data, when present, is included within the `SingleCellExperiment` as an "Alternative Experiment" named `"CITEseq"` , which can be accessed with the following command:

```r
altExp(sce, "CITEseq")
```

Within this, the main expression matrix is again found in the `counts` assay, with each column corresponding to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponding to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
Column names are again cell barcode sequences and row names the antibody targets for each ADT. 

The following additional per-cell data columns for the CITE-seq data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#cell-metrics)).

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `altexps_CITEseq_sum  `    | UMI count for CITE-seq ADTs                       |
| `altexps_CITEseq_detected` | Number of ADTs detected per cell (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `altexps_CITEseq_percent`  | Percent of `total` UMI count from ADT reads       |

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `DataFrame` stored as `rowData` within the alternative experiment:

```r
adt_info <- rowData(altExp(sce, "CITEseq"))
```

This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT:

| Column name | Contents                                                       |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `mean`      | Mean ADT count across all cells/droplets                       |
| `detected`  | Number of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |

Finally, additional metadata for the CITE-seq data processing can be found in the metadata slot of the alternative experiment, with the same contents as the [parent experiment metadata](#experiment-metadata)

```r
citeseq_metadata <- metadata(altExp(sce, "CITEseq"))
```
